---
title: Fault tolerance
weight: 5
draft: true
---

Tests and assumptions can be understood as an aspect of fault tolerance, which itself is an aspect of error handling. Fault tolerance is the idea that an error in one part of the pipeline should not cause the whole to fall over. This means that errors in a few rows should not prevent a table from loading. It also means that failure in a few tables should not halt the entire pipeline. In a large-scale pipeline with hundreds or thousands of tables, the probability of errors occurring in each batch is high. Consequently, fault tolerance becomes a necessity, not an optional extra. The goal of fault tolerance is not to eliminate all errors. The goal is to ensure that the pipeline continues to function in the presence of errors, and that errors are surfaced in a way that is meaningful and actionable. This chapter introduces three common fault patterns:

- Uniqueness

- Existence

- Stability

Each pattern is accompanied by practical techniques for detection and mitigation. While broad, these patterns are not exhaustive. Rather, they illustrate a mindset of building a fault tolerant pipeline.

## Uniqueness

If the basic task of data engineering is to relate real-world objects and processes into the data world, then the most common quality problem is that of uniqueness and existence. Uniqueness dictates that one record in the real world corresponds to at most one database record, and vice versa. Uniqueness is violated when one real-world entity appears as two records in the database. This can happen when a staff member accidentally enters the same transaction twice. The reverse is also true. Uniqueness is violated when two distinct real-world entities are forced to occupy the same database record. This may happen if a staff are identified by first and last name. If a staff member joins who uses an existing name, the two staff will have the same identifier value in the database. Uniqueness violations can come from failures in business processes, as in the examples above. It can also come from mechanical failures, such as an incremental load logic incorrectly loading the same records twice

The data engineer must express all uniqueness expectations in the warehouse. These expectations are not just technical constraints. They are best seen as statements of business intent. The simplest way to express uniqueness is through a unique constraint in the database. If the constraint is violated, the pipeline has two options:

- Abort the load and leave the data as it was; or

- Apply automatic de-duplication, send the duplicates to a reject table, and allow

the rest to proceed. The second approach is explained in the chapter Load mechanics. In either case, the violation must be surfaced. A monitoring report should alert the user. If the violation is frequent, a different treatment is necessary. Repeated alerts can lead to the "cry-wolf" effect of dulling attention. In such cases, the data engineer should implement targeted handling for the table. For example, instead of relying on a uniqueness constraint, the pipeline can perform de-duplication during transformation and store duplicates in a separate table for review. Such techniques are illustrated in Dealing with data quality. Expressing uniqueness expectations consistently is one of the most effective ways to improve the correspondence between the data world and the real world. It is also one of the most direct ways to build trust.

## Existence

The criteria for existence can be handled similarly as uniqueness. Existence dictates that the record must exist in the database if the object exists in the real world, and vice versa. Sometimes this "object" can be a property or an attribute. For example, a completed sales record must have a sales amount. Existence is violated when the real-world entity exists, but it does not occur in the database, as in the case if the staff has forgotten to record the sales amount. It is also violated when a database record exists, but the real-world entity does not, as in the case when a record fails to be deleted during an incremental load. While uniqueness violation tends to come from failure in the business process, existence violation often comes from the mechanics of data warehousing. For example, during batch loads, the Cake.SaleItems table may be extracted at a different time to the Cake.Sales table, leading to inconsistency where one exists without the other. In traditional warehousing this is called late arriving transactions. Existence can be expressed in the database through the "not null" constraint on a column. In the case of sales requiring sales amount, it is a matter of applying the not

null constraint on the Cake.Sales[Sales amount] column. This is not just a technical safeguard. It is a statement of business intent. In more complex cases such as the Cake.SaleItems detail table requiring the existence of rows in the Cake.Sales header table, then the detail can left-join to the header, and apply a not null constraint on the header ID. This would alert the engineer if the detail ever missed a header. When encountering a violation, the data pipeline can apply similar automation as that of uniqueness by sending violating rows into a reject table and allowing the rest to proceed. As with the case of violation, repeated occurrences of the existence violation will need more targeted handling. For example, instead of left joining Cake.Sales and Cake.SaleItems, an inner join would ensure that no sale items are presented if they are missing a header sale record. However, this treatment should not lead to a silencing of error. If the records do not catch up, suitable tests should alert of prolonged discrepancies. In the case of incremental load, extra attention is needed to ensure records catch up. For the case of existence, the best mindset for an engineer is to build the pipeline as if it were streaming. In this case:

- Tables may load continuously, or at least a few times a day

- Some may not load from time to time

- Tables may load in random, out of order

In these cases, existence of records may be violated in unpredictable ways, but the pipeline should handle these cases by catching up in the next batch. This is the mindset that would lead to the most fault tolerant pipeline.

## Stability

Stability is a concept from mathematics and from physics. In computational mathematics, it refers to the idea that small changes in inputs should lead to small changes in outputs. In physics, it's the difference between a ball on top of a hill versus a ball at the bottom of the valley. A ball on the top of the hill is instable while the one at the bottom is stable. This is because small perturbation in the former will lead to the ball rolling off, while perturbation in the latter will lead to the ball returning to its original position. In similar fashion, a data pipeline needs to be stable. This means that small changes in the real world should lead to small changes in the database world. Particularly, small changes in information should lead to corresponding level of create, update, delete (CRUD) operations.

However, while the real world rarely has massive number of changes — that is, users rarely go back and rewrite all the historical records — the database world often suffers from massive changes that are accidental rather than real. This can happen during server updates that cause the [Row update datetime] values to all change. If uncontrolled, accidental changes that lead to large changes can significantly harm stakeholder confidence. For example, failing to load the country reference table, which is a small table of 100 or 200 records, leading to complete disappearance of country data in the warehouse. In addition, such uncontrolled operations can also bring down a server when there are too many CRUD operations than normal. Consequently, a developer has the responsibility of ensuring that the pipeline is built so that its changes are commensurate with real world changes. Sudden increase in changes may indicate an error. To build such a pipeline, the data engineer needs to avoid instable elements. For example, a column called [Today’s date], which is sometimes used for reporting, on a table will cause every row to change every day. Columns that are non-deterministic should also be avoided. Non-determinism often creeps in unintentionally when a column’s value is determined by a ranking, and the ranking columns are not sufficiently specified to return the same value every run. This leads to rows changing despite no change in the real world. Moreover, single row tables such as Cake.LatestLoadDate that contain the latest load of the data should be avoided. The same effect can be achieved with appending data rather than overwriting. Violations of stability can be caught by stability thresholds. For example, the data pipeline should abort the table’s load if more than 5% of the records are to be deleted. The implementation of this is explained in Load mechanics. Apart from the automation with stability thresholds, data engineer habits are also important. One habit is to avoid having wide tables with miscellaneous attributes. In such a table, change in any cell value causes the whole row to update. This effectively amplifies the impact of real-world changes to database changes. Instead, data engineers should build table fragments so that each table has clear meaning, and so changes to that table’s rows correspond to those meanings. Another habit is to avoid placing reference tables at the beginning of the data pipeline. Accidental small changes to reference tables would have massive impacts downstream, as is the case of the country codes. More of these concepts in the Efficient & stable pipeline, particularly in Load mechanics and Dependencies.

## Conclusion

Uniqueness, existence, and stability violations are three common patterns of faults. They can be handled in a generic way using standard automation, but also through specific pipeline design in the case of frequent violations. Good habits also improve fault tolerance. With fragmentation, tests, assumptions, narrow tables, and thoughtful dependency management, the data engineer has an arsenal of tools to handle common problems. However, the possibilities of errors are limitless. For example, in parallel loads or a busy server, we may never be able to fully eliminate deadlocks. And thus we will need to implement deadlock retries. It will not be fruitful to enumerate all the errors. Instead, the focus is on the mindset, rather than on the set of techniques. The experienced data engineer does not focus solely on what is working right now, but also thinks about what can go wrong. This is the third of the four data engineer principles — anticipate errors. The final comment on fault tolerance is that the engineer must have a mindset of expecting errors, learning from errors, and writing code that can capture them. Developing this mindset will take time. The best guide for the engineer is well stated by the Zen of Python: "Errors should never pass silently. Unless explicitly silenced."
