---
title: The craft of dimensional modelling
description: Introduces dimensional modelling in Power BI as the central craft for turning curated information into intuitive, usable insight.
lede: Dimensional modelling is the craft of turning information into a usable analytical product.
weight: 1
draft: true
---

Creating information focused on building reusable blocks of information. These are meaningful fragments. This part, Presenting insights, looks at turning them into consumable products that deliver answers in a way that is easy, intuitive and accurate. The modern rise of technology has propelled the ways in which data engineers are expected to embed data insights. Machine learning models, embedded analytics, and real-time applications have all areas where a data engineer may need to present insights. However, one method has stood the test of time and is thus the essential skill for a data engineer. It is the discipline of dimensional modelling. Dimensional modelling, pioneered by Ralph Kimball, remains a go-to approach for communicating business insights. More recently, Microsoft Power BI semantic models have become a popular tool for business intelligence. It is particularly adept at allowing non-technical business users to interact with their data in an intuitive way, thus lowering the barrier to data analysis. A Power BI semantic model is also useful for producing multiple reports. At its core, Power BI is also centred on dimensional models. Hence, a dimensional model in Power BI is a powerful vehicle for surfacing insights, and is the subject of this part of the text. While building a data pipeline is largely a scientific exercise grounded in computer science mindset of minimal information, creating a dimensional model in Power BI is more of an art. While technically demanding, its central challenge lies in anticipating how users will interact with the product. There is a focus on the model’s look and feel, its clarity, and its intuitive alignment with business intent. Dimensional modelling, therefore, is a craft shaped by experience and judgement. It is not difficult to build an effective dimensional model. If the data engineer has laid a strong foundation with meaningful information fragments that become facts, expressive reference tables ready to be converted into dimensions, and binary flag columns that simplify measure definitions, then building the model is simply a matter of assembling these elements in a way that anticipates user queries. The real challenge for a data engineer is not how to build the dimensional model, but what to build. A useful starting point for new data engineers is to become familiar with two guiding questions: What does a good dimensional model do? and What does a good dimensional model look and feel like?
